# Macroplastic pollution in freshwater environments: Focusing public and policy action

## Introduction

Plastic pollution is one of today’s most prominent environmen- tal challenges. Awareness of the potential damage to the
world’s oceans (Beaumont et al., 2019; Galgani and Loiselle, 2019) has grown. Governments, businesses and the general
public are begin- ning to take action, often in a rather uncoordinated manner and based on limited information. The
majority of plastics that end up in the world’s oceans are carried there by rivers, with studies showing up to 80%
(Schmidt et al., 2017; Schwarz et al., 2019). Sig- niﬁcant research attention has focused on marine plastics, while only
13% of published studies have been dedicated to plastic pollu- tion in freshwater environments (Blettler et al., 2018).
Of these, the majority (76%) are on microplastics i.e. unidentiﬁable plastic pieces < 5 mm in size. The limited
information on freshwater envi- ronments and the hydrological link between source and sink ini- tially suggests that
types and quantities of macroplastics (>5 mm in size) in freshwater ecosystems might be comparable to those found in the
marine environment. However, no studies have com- pared these environments, even though such information is funda-
mental to addressing the freshwater pollution load through focused and distributed mitigation approaches.

Recent evidence indicates that freshwater environments act as both source of plastic pollution to the marine
environment, as well as sink, potentially preventing a proportion from reaching the oceans (Horton et al., 2017;
Lebreton et al., 2017; Schmidt et al., 2017). The presence of plastics in river and lake sediments (Corcoran et al.,
2015; Wang et al., 2018; Schwarz et al., 2019) is evidence of this sink, as is the large discrepancy between the plas-
tic waste present in the ocean (1%) and the estimates of total waste input (van Sebille et al., 2015). There are
multiple mechanisms that inﬂuence the transport, sedimentation, degradation and perma- nence of macroplastics in
freshwater environments. These include polymer type, bioﬁlm formation, size, shape (inﬂuencing density) as well as the
hydrological characteristics of the river or lake (Chen et al., 2019; Schwarz et al., 2019). There is a clear link
between product type and many of these properties, as polymer type, litter size, shape and density provide speciﬁc
properties that may inﬂuence its fate (Ryberg et al., 2019). Their presence in even the most remote freshwater
environments is evidence of their per- manence (Imhof et al., 2013; Free et al., 2014).

Marine studies place plastic bags, bottles, packaging straps and ﬁshing lines in oceans as the most common plastic
pollution items globally (Blettler et al., 2018). Beach studies identify cigarette butts, food wrappers, drinks bottles
and straws/stirrers as the dominant items (www.coastalcleanupdata.org, accessed 9th July 2019). The limited freshwater
studies conducted have also found these items in freshwater environments in the UK and Europe (e.g. Morritt et al.,
2014; Joint Research Centre (European Commission), 2018).

A comparison of the most prevalent macroplastic items in freshwater versus marine environments has not been conducted,
nor has a thorough investigation of macroplastic prevalence in freshwaters. There are only a handful of studies
examining the typologies of freshwater macroplastic pollution, often using differ- ent categories and inconsistent
collection methods. This compli- cates public, corporate and personal decision making to address the challenge of
reducing these ubiquitous macropollutants. Given the number of organisations conducting research and collecting data on
the subject, the overall lack of accessible information cre- ates large knowledge gaps that prevent priority setting.

Recent polls have found that a growing number of people rate plastic pollution as a priority environmental concern
(IFAT, 2018; Ipsos MORI, 2018). There has been an increase in plastics-related policy change at international and
national levels (Bourguignon, 2018; Defra, 2019), as well as industry reaction and campaigning by environmental advocacy groups. There is a clear need
for focused research and effective action (by consumers, businesses and policy-makers) (Heidbreder et al., 2019).

The present study identiﬁes and prioritises the most prevalent macroplastic items present in freshwater environments,
with the purpose of informing public action to reduce plastic use, waste and pollution. We compare recent studies of
freshwater plastics pollution with marine studies and available data on litter rates. Our focus is on consumer plastic
items, i.e. those that could poten- tially be reduced by actions by the public, industry and govern- ment intervention.
Our analysis focuses on knowledge gaps in current freshwater macroplastic pollution research and addresses potential
strategies to ﬁll these. We focus on one geographic region (Europe) with a method that could be extended to inform
related studies that address this global challenge.

## Methodology

### Search strategy

In October 2018, relevant data from the published and grey lit- erature were identiﬁed using a systematic search method,
follow- ing the guidelines of CEBC Evidence Synthesis Guidelines (Collaboration for Environmental Evidence, 2018). To
ﬁnd the best search string, 14 test searches using Boolean search strings were run (see Supplementary Information Table
1). Relevant studies were identiﬁed using the ﬁnal search string with Scopus, ISI Web of Science and Science Direct
using classiﬁcation based keywords. In addition, we took the ﬁrst 100 hits of an advanced search per- formed using
Google.co.uk, Google Scholar (patents excluded) and ResearchGate (including conference presentations and posters as well
as reports, journal papers and datasets). Our search was restricted to English language search terms and to the years
2012–2018. To keep geographic consistency, the review was lim- ited to European studies of consumer related
macroplastics.

In total, 857 peer reviewed published studies were collated and primary information was extracted (year of publication
and data collection, title, authors, country, publication) from each. To focus the analysis on the central aim of the
study, inclusion and exclu- sion criteria were developed (see Supplementary Information Table 2). To assess observer
bias in the application of these criteria, the titles and abstracts of a subset of 50 papers were vetted by two
reviewers. The ﬁnal Kappa score between reviewers showed near perfect agreement (0.92).

The review of 857 titles and abstracts identiﬁed 27 European freshwater litter studies as meeting the criteria. These
were from studies in France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Switzerland, Republic of Ireland and the UK, or pan-European. Full
texts of these 27 studies were reviewed and the following information collated: observa- tional or experimental; sample
size (total litter items); temporal and spatial scales; location; study environment (river/estuary/- coast/riparian
zones, wetlands, lakes and water column/surface of water/beach/riverbank/riverbed/etc.); survey method; total num- ber
of plastic item(s) identiﬁed; and proportion (or count) of each type of plastic item. Measures were taken to prevent the
introduc- tion of bias through language, publication status or reviewer.

After full texts had been reviewed, nine studies were found to provide sufﬁciently robust and numerous data to be
included in the study:

1. « Five UK-specific studies - from the Thames (Morritt et al., 2014; Thames21, 2017), Crane (Friends of the River Crane,
2017) and Helford (Hirons, 2013) rivers, and estuaries in N. Ireland (Williams et al., 2017)
2. « Three country-specific studies - a river study from France (Bruge et al., 2018), lake study from Switzerland
(Hammerdirt Association, 2016) and lake study from Poland (Czarkowski et al., 2016)
3. One pan-European rivers study (Joint Research Centre (Euro- pean Commission), 2018)

### Data handling and analysis

Data from all nine studies were grouped in 15 categories of con- sumer plastic waste: food wrappers; cotton bud sticks;
plastic bot- tles; plastic food containers, plastic lids, plastic cups, plastic carrier bags, plastic straws/cutlery;
cigarette butts, smoking-related pack- aging, shoes, plastic toys, shotgun cartridges, balloons/balloon sticks. The
categories were as speciﬁc as the available data would allow, and not all items were present in all studies. Variations
in reporting methods between studies required that some data were aggregated; e.g. for sanitary items, some studies
reported results for all sanitary items together, whilst others separated items out (e.g. wet wipes, nappies, sanitary
protection). We did not include data on unidentiﬁed plastic pieces or items, or within any cate- gories considered to be
related to ﬁshing, construction, industrial and agricultural activities.

Prevalence of each item was represented by percentage of total litter collected for each study. For Czarkowski et al.,
2016, we used the mean values reported for proportion of litter items found across ﬁve study lakes. For Williams et al.,
2017, only data from the three estuary sites were included, while marine sites were excluded. Due to limitations of the
River Crane study (plastic bot- tles were the only macroplastic item recorded; Friends of the River Crane, 2017), this
study was not included in the analysis to avoid over-representation of this plastic type.

### 2.3. Ranking the results

Two approaches were used to account for the varying dimen- sions of the selected studies and prevent the possibility of
over- representation of results from studies with a smaller number of plastic items recorded (Fig. 1). The ﬁrst approach
was based on assigning a weighted score to each study, based on the total litter items recorded. In this approach, the
mean number of items col- lected across all studies was used to calculate the proportional con- tribution of each study,
relative to the mean. For example, a study that collected the same number of items as the mean had an assigned weight of
1; a study with half as many items as the mean had an assigned weight of 0.5. For each study, the prevalence of each
litter item was corrected by the respective weight of that study. The second approach did not apply any weighting to
correct prevalence of items, using the original percentages based on the reported number of litter items. The litter
categories were then put into ranked lists, based on the mean presence for each litter category across the nine studies.
The ranks and sensitivity between approaches was compared.

Bias created by any particular study was tested by comparing the relationship between ranking of an item and the number
of studies that recorded that item. Spearman’s rank correlation (q) was applied to compare ranks generated by different
datasets and ranking approaches, considering 12 degrees of freedom and a = 0.01.

Grubb’s test was used to identify potential outliers (Grubbs, 1969). Potential outliers were identiﬁed and a comparison
made of their Grubbs statistic ((xout-xavg)/s) to a Grubbs critical value, which is based on the number of samples. For
data points within each study that were identiﬁed as signiﬁcant outliers, the effect of their removal on the ﬁnal ranked
list was examined and tested for signiﬁcance (degrees of freedom = 12, a = 0.01), to identify whether any resulting changes
to the ranked list after removal of the anomalies were signiﬁcant.

### 2.4 Comparison with marine prevalence studies

To identify differences between data on European freshwater and marine macroplastic pollution, we compared the present
study with three large scale marine studies, each representing different geographical dimensions: from the UK, Europe
(European Environment Agency, 2019) and worldwide (Ocean Conservancy, 2018b
http://discomap.eea.europa.eu/map/fme/MLWPivotExport. htm). Other studies were reviewed, but inconsistency in data
reporting did not allow comparison. The ranked lists from each study were compared to the present freshwater study,
based on the percentage of all litter for each item (degrees of freedom = 12, a = 0.01). Outliers were identiﬁed and
their effect on comparisons with the available marine studies was tested.

## Results

For the study weighted approach, weightings ranging from 0.02 to 5.62. The aggregate ranking using all studies indicated
that plas- tic bottles, food wrappers and cigarette butts were the dominant categories of freshwater plastic pollution
(Table 1). The ranking of the unweighted approach showed a prevalence of plastic bottles, food wrappers and bags.

The unweighted and weighted rankings showed a signiﬁcant differences in the ﬁnal prevalence rankings (q = 0.79) (Table
2). The most signiﬁcant change that occurred was the movement of plastic bags from number 10 (0.69% of all litter) in
the weighted approach, to number 4 (5.49% of all litter) with no weighting. This can be attributed to very high
percentages of bags being recorded in two studies with very low sample numbers and therefore with a low overall
weighting, with plastic bags counting for 23.7% and 9.86% (average all studies 5.49%). The other two most affected were
takeaway containers (from rank 4 from 8) and cups (move from rank 6 to 9), which resulted from the low weight assigned 
to the Polish study (Czarkowski et al., 2016).

The use of weighted averages skewed the analysis of the vari- ance of study data, making it impossible to report
appropriate con- ﬁdence intervals and standard deviations of the proportions of all litter, all plastic litter and all
identiﬁable plastic litter. Given these inherent challenges, we accepted the possibility of a study size bias by using
the unweighted data used for all further analysis. This is based on the assumption that the study size has a lower
inﬂuence on the prominence of speciﬁc categories with respect to other fac- tors including location (nation, ecosystem),
transport mechanisms and source.

### Top ten consumer-related macroplastic items

Of the 192,213 litter items counted, an average of 71% (±12%) were identiﬁed as plastic and 59% (±15%) were identiﬁable
as con- sumer related macroplastic items. This identiﬁcation was performed visually and followed a similar approach in
all studies. It should be noted that visual identiﬁcation of macroplastics type has inherent errors that should be
considered. This has been shown in manual sorting of plastic waste in waste management (Shahbudin et al., 2010). The 
other recorded items were non- plastic pieces, unidentiﬁed items, or industrial, agricultural or ﬁshing related.

The ranking of the plastic categories (Table 3) shows that the top three items – food wrappers, bottles and lids, and
bags - made up 22% of all litter, 24% of all plastic and 33% of identiﬁable plastic. Five of the top ten were food
related, two were sanitary/cosmetic, and two were smoking related. The total top ten make up 41.81% of all litter, or
43% of all plastic litter and 58% of identiﬁable plastic litter.

It should be noted that for the Polish study (Czarkowski et al., 2016), it was not possible to calculate proportions of
plastic only items out of all litter collected. The percentage of plastic litter and the percentage of identiﬁable
litter were calculated across seven of the eight studies. The resulting percentages (Table 3) for the three items
recorded by that study (bottles, bags, cigarette packaging) were lower than percentage of all litter.

### Robustness of ﬁnal rank of freshwater plastic pollution

The ﬁnal ranking was tested with respect to total occurrence of each item in the selected studies by comparing the rank
for each item against the number of studies that recorded that item. There was a signiﬁcant relationship indicating that the ﬁnal
ranking rep- resented the aggregate information from the original studies.

Five data points were identiﬁed as potential outliers across four studies, (Table 4). The most notable was the
prevalence of cigarette butts recorded in the Lake Geneva study, which was signiﬁcantly higher than in the others.
Cotton bud sticks were signiﬁcantly more prevalent in the Thames 21 study than the other eight stud- ies, plastic bags
were signiﬁcantly more prevalent in the Poland study, and sanitary items and cigarette packaging were signiﬁ- cantly
more prevalent in the deeper water column of the River Thames (Morritt et al., 2014).

Individual removal of each outlier changed the overall ranks of plastic items, but not their presence in the top ten.
When all the potential outliers were removed, the top ten changed signiﬁcantly (q = 0.78), although once again the same
items remained the top ten. The top ten represented 43% of all plastic litter with outliers removed.

### Comparison with marine macroplastic prevalence data

Comparisons of the ranks of plastic pollution items between marine and freshwater studies indicated a poor correlation
between items identiﬁed in the freshwater studies compared to marine studies (Table 6). On the other hand, the ranks 
between individual marine studies were highly correlated. Prevalence of speciﬁc plastic items inﬂuenced these compar- isons. The removal of the category
‘‘straws/stirrers/cutlery” from the comparison increased the correlation (p < 0.01) between the freshwater ranking and
the OC UK and OC Global rankings. The removal of ‘‘sanitary items” from the comparison led to a weak cor- relation
between the freshwater study and the OC UK marine stud- ies. Sanitary items were found to be much higher in freshwater
with respect to marine, while ‘‘straws/stirrers/cutlery” were found to be much more prevalent in marine studies.

### Comparison with litter rates

Comparing litter rates with litter presence was performed using national studies (UK). A ranking of the items with the
highest litter rates (Table 7) (Elliott and Elliott, 2018) showed no correlation with the most prevalent plastic items
in freshwater environments in Europe (q = 0.27) or with the ranking of plastic items found in UK freshwater environments
(q = 0.04). The top three most littered items were sanitary items, cigarette butts and cotton bud sticks, all of which
are known to enter freshwater environments through drainage systems, with sanitary items and cotton buds in particu-
lar being commonly reported (Gouda, 2014; Resource Futures, 2018).

## Discussion

### Plastics top ten

Of the 14 categories of plastic litter items, the top ten most prevalent ranked were:

1. Food wrappers
2. Bottles and lids
3. Bags
4. Cigarette butts
5. Sanitary items
6. Smoking-related packaging
7. Cotton bud sticks
8. Takeaway containers
9. Cups
10. Straws, stirrers, cutlery

The percentage prevalence for each category after number nine (Cups) dropped to less than 1%, indicating that the last
ﬁve cate- gories were low contributors to freshwater plastic pollution in Eur- ope. Considering the top ten, these items
made up 43% of all the plastic litter recorded. A focused effort to reduce these item poses a signiﬁcant opportunity for
targeted action to reduce pollution. In particular, the top three most prevalent items, food wrappers, bot- tles and
lids, and bags together made up 22% of all plastic litter recorded. This present clear targets for government, business,
NGOs and other stakeholders in their plastic reduction efforts. However, it should be noted that the reduction of
plastic use and management at its source has been shown to be more effective than policy (Willis et al., 2018). A
secondary opportunity remains the interception and removal of macroplastics within the river environment (Blettler et
al., 2018).

In the present study, focused on Europe, there were a limited number of outliers and inconsistencies across the eight
studies. While the rank order was sensitive to the inclusion of individual studies, the ﬁnal top ten remained
consistent. Likewise, some items did not appear in all studies, with the lowest number of stud- ies in which any single
item appears was ﬁve. The fact that some items were more consistently recorded than others indicates the need for a
common global approach to recording plastic pollution items in freshwater environments.

The comparison between plastic pollution in freshwater envi- ronments and that identiﬁed in marine studies showed that
mar- ine and freshwater environments have signiﬁcantly different macroplastic compositions. This limits the utility of
marine studies to address freshwater pollution challenges. Given that the most sensitive items to this comparison,
sanitary items and ‘‘straws/stirrers/cutlery” showed opposite tendencies in freshwater and mar- ine studies, there are likely to be differences in
residence time and degradability that inﬂuence their persistence in one or the other environment, as well as different
entrance mechanisms to the aquatic environment (Lambert and Wagner, 2018). Other dif- ferences are also present in the
transport mechanism between river and marine conditions (Kooi et al., 2018) and the possibility of removal by riparian
vegetation and ﬂow restrictions. The clear difference between freshwater and marine rankings, and the con- sistency of
marine rankings across different geographical areas highlight the need for a better understanding of the fates of these
items in these two environments.

The discrepancy between the rank of macroplastic items that are most littered (in the UK) and the rank of macroplastic
items present in the freshwater environment indicates that there is a notable knowledge gap regarding how these
materials move through the environment. In particular, more information regard- ing transport mechanisms (horizontal
transport) and potential deposition dynamics (vertical transport) is needed, both in the water (Battisti et al., 2017)
as well as around freshwater ecosys- tems. Studies indicate that low density polymers, used in thin walled larger
plastic are more likely to be transported through the river system (Schwarz et al., 2019). Regarding the littered
macroplastic data, the highest ranked macroplastics were largely related to sanitary items (Table 7), which are often
released into the public sewer system. Compared to their lower presence in the freshwater environment, it is likely that
the relatively higher density of these waterlogged plastic items may reduce their pres- ence in freshwater studies.
Other possible explanations may be the increased difﬁculty in their identiﬁcation as well as the variable efﬁciencies of
wastewater treatment systems (Lahens et al., 2018). This discrepancy points to the need for further study of the fate of
individual plastic items.

### Knowledge gaps

The present study demonstrated the top ten macroplastic items related to freshwater plastic pollution in the study
region (Europe). While targeting the reduction of the emission of these items into the environment, further efforts
should be made to understand the potential inﬂuence of the following on their presence and permanence:

1. Differences in waste management and littering behaviour between countries
2. Differences in plastic items found in lakes, estuaries/tidal rivers and non-tidal rivers in relation to transport
mechanisms
3. Depth speciﬁc residence time, comparing the presence of speciﬁc items on the water surface to those found in deeper
waters or sediment.

All three of these challenges were highlighted in the discrep- ancy between marine and freshwater studies, as well as
differences between studies. For example, in the Lake Geneva study, preva- lence of cigarette butts was greater than 20%
of the total macroplastics, compared to values below 2% in other studies. This could be associated to differences in
littering behaviour and wastewater treatment, but also be related to the hydrological con- ditions of a closed waterbody
or the characteristics of cigarette related materials in freshwater. The prolonged hydrophobicity and low density of
many cigarette ﬁlters as well as their slow decomposition rate would increase their accumulation in closed waterbodies
(Araújo and Costa, 2019). Another possible cause may be an increased load in of cigarette butts to Lake Geneva, with
respect to other freshwater ecosystems examined in the present study. However, the incidence of smoking in Switzerland
is one of the lowest in Europe (WHO/EURO, 2019). Additional studies should address these knowledge gaps to better inform
targeted actions to reduce macroplastics in freshwater environments. Con- sistent and large scale information would help
to support policy and business actions for each litter category, such as sanitary items, as suggested by Morritt
(Morritt et al., 2014).

### Towards more consistent macroplastic sampling and identiﬁcation methods

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135242.

The present study highlighted several major shortcomings in the identiﬁcation of the macroplastic pollution in
freshwater envi- ronments. There is a clear lack of consistency in identiﬁcation cat- egories and approaches.
Inconsistent recording of macroplastics reduces the utility of this growing number of studies. Furthermore, data are not
collected in a standardised manner. For example, while there are numerous litter collection schemes in riverine
environments, there is no single agreed-upon method, common database or coordinating institution. An internationally
consistent methodology, including a consistent categorisation is required. The Ocean Conservancy TIDES database is a
good example of where this has been achieved in marine litter recording (Ocean Conservancy, 2019). Collaboration to
merge these data sources regionally or internationally would provide more detailed basis for action to reduce freshwater
plastic litter.

5. Conclusions

Bruge, A., Barreau, C., Carlot, J., Collin, H., Moreno, C., Maison, P., 2018. Monitoring litter inputs from the Adour
River (Southwest France) environment. J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 6 (1), 24. to the marine

As a result of the high proﬁle of plastic pollution issues, there have been a bewildering array of recommendations
provided, most of which are based on a limited understanding of the problem (Pahl et al., 2017). A reduction on the
plastic pollution load to freshwater environments would beneﬁt from a prioritised action by government (waste management
and policy), businesses (pro- ducers and distributors) and the public. Many businesses are tak- ing action as a response
of internal mechanisms and public pressure. However, an informed member of the public has very limited guidance on which
brands and companies to support, which ‘environmentally-friendly’ products to choose or actions to follow. A consistent
public campaign focused on the proper management across actors of the top ten priority macroplastics would lead to an
important reduction of their presence in the environment (Blettler and Wantzen, 2019).

The present study shows that the three top items are directly related to single use short term food acquisitions. As
these account for 22% percent of the overall litter, the impact of new programmes to address these items, by
distribution chains and local recycling, could be signiﬁcant. Rates of recycling in Europe reach 30%. It should be noted
that these rates are far lower in developing countries, which have an increasing plastic use (Wu et al., 2018). Smoke
related packaging and cigarette butts made up 7%. As these items are more easily associated to a single group of
manufacturers and end users, differences in taxing and consumption characteristics between nations would allow for a
more precise determination of the deterrent capacity of policy based approaches.