# Revealing the role of land-use features on macrolitter distribution in Swiss freshwaters✩

Macrolitter, especially macroplastics, (> 0.5 cm) negatively impact freshwater ecosystems, where they can be retained
along lake shores, riverbanks, floodplains or bed sediments. Long-term and large-scale assessments of macrolitter on
riverbanks and lake shores provide an understanding of litter abundance, composition, and origin in freshwater systems.
Combining macrolitter quantification with hydrometeorological variables allows further study of leakage, transport, and
accumulation characteristics. Several studies have explored the role of hydrometeorological factors in influencing
macrolitter distribution and found that river discharge, runoff, and wind only partially explains its distribution.
Other factors, such as land-use features, have not yet been thoroughly investigated. In this study, we provide a
country-scale assessment of land-use influence on macrolitter abundance in freshwater systems. We analyzed the
composition of the most commonly found macrolitter items (referred to as ‘top items’, n = 42,565) sampled across lake
shores and riverbanks in Switzerland between April 2020 and May 2021. We explored the relationship between eleven land-
use features and macrolitter abundance at survey locations (n = 143). The land-use features included buildings, city
centers, public infrastructure, recreational areas, forests, marshlands, vineyards, orchards, other land, and rivers and
canals. The majority of top items are significantly and positively correlated with land-use features related to urban
coverage, notably roads and buildings. Over 60% of top items were found to be correlated with either roads or buildings.
Notably, tobacco, food and beverage-related products, as well as packaging and sanitary products, showed strong
associations with these urban land-use features. Other types of items, however, did not exhibit a relationship with
land-use features, such as industry and construction-related items. Ultimately, this highlights the need to combine
measures at the local and regional/national scales for effective litter reduction.

## Introduction

Macrolitter is a ubiquitous environmental risk, affecting both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems (van Emmerik and
Schwarz, 2020). A growing amount of observational evidence shows high levels of exposure of freshwater ecosystems to
macrolitter, with plastic found as the dominant material (van Emmerik et al., 2020). Macroplastics can threaten
ecosystems, injure animals, cause economic damage by clogging hydraulic infrastructures, and lead to increased urban
flood risks (van Emmerik and Schwarz, 2020; Azevedo-Santos et al., 2021). Despite these threats, the leakage processes and
transport pathways of macrolitter in freshwater systems remain largely unknown. Large- scale quantification of
macrolitter abundance in freshwater systems has only been undertaken recently (Barer and Kull, 2018; Hengstmann and
Fischer, 2020; van Emmerik and Schwarz, 2020; González-Fernández et al., 2021). As a result, only a handful of studies
have so far explored the drivers of macrolitter variability in freshwater systems (Cowger et al., 2019; Roebroek et al., 
2021a; Cowger et al., 2022; Schuyler et al., 2022; Tasseron et al., 2023). Additional
research on this would be essential for guiding effective litter reduction and mitigation strategies.

The most commonly used methods to quantify macrolitter involve sampling either the freshwater surface or lake shores and
riverbanks (Castro-Jiménez et al., 2019; van Emmerik et al., 2019; Mason et al., 2020; van Emmerik and Schwarz, 2020;
Tasseron et al., 2020). Floating macrolitter assessments typically use visual counting of macrolitter items from bridges
or deploy nets to retrieve water samples from boats or bridges. These monitoring techniques require the presence of
infras- tructure or the availability of equipment. In addition, they only provide a ‘snapshot’ view of the quantity and
composition of floating litter at a given time. By contrast, monitoring macrolitter abundance on river and lake banks
allows one to cover larger geographical areas and to conduct more frequent observations (Vriend et al., 2020). As a
result, some countries have deployed large-scale monitoring programs of macrolitter abundance along riverbanks and lake
shores, often relying on the par- ticipation of trained volunteers. This is the case in the Netherlands with the Schone
Rivieren (Clean Rivers) initiative (van Emmerik and Schwarz, 2020), the Swiss Litter Report in Switzerland (Barer and
Kull, 2018), and the Great Canadian Shoreline Cleanup (Hengstmann and Fischer, 2020). These large-scale and long-term
monitoring programs provide baseline estimates of macrolitter quantities and composition. They can also be used to
explore fundamental transport and accumulation processes of macrolitter in freshwater systems.

processes of macrolitter in freshwater systems. Despite baseline assessments of macrolitter in freshwater ecosys- tems
becoming more common, the factors determining its variabil- ity remain largely unresolved. Macrolitter found on
riverbanks and lake shores comes either from terrestrial pathways (direct littering or dumping) or from transport from
the aquatic systems (river flow and lake currents) (Mellink et al., 2022; Roebroek et al., 2021a). It is commonly
assumed that hydrometeorological variables, such as precipitation, wind speed, water flow velocity, and river discharge
play an important role in the transport and deposition of macrolitter items along the banks of freshwater bodies (Liro
et al., 2020; Bruge et al., 2018; Haberstroh et al., 2021; Roebroek et al., 2021a). Other factors affecting macrolitter
transport and accumulation processes pertain to the items characteristics, (e.g. buoyancy, level of biofouling, shape
and size) and the aquatic system characteristics (e.g. meanders and channel width in the case of rivers) (Lechthaler et
al., 2020; Lobelle et al., 2021; Newbould et al., 2021). Macrolitter abundance on riverbanks and lake shores can also
come from mobilization through terrestrial path- ways (Mellink et al., 2022). In this case, wind speed and surface
runoff are also presumed to be major drivers of macrolitter transport (Lebreton et al., 2017; Meijer et al., 2021;
Roebroek et al., 2021a). A study on macrolitter abundance on the Dutch riverbanks demonstrated the influence of
hydrometeorological factors, but also highlighted that the studied variables (wind speed, flow velocity and
precipitation) only accounted for 19% of macrolitter variability (Roebroek et al., 2021a). Similarly, Tasseron et al.
(2023) investigated the relation- ship between environmental drivers, such as rainfall, sunlight, wind speed, tidal
regimes, and macrolitter transport, revealing minimal and statistically insignificant correlations. Other potential
driving factors have not yet been studied in relation to macrolitter abundance and composition in freshwater systems,
but may play an important role. These include partially stochastic events such as direct littering and dumping of
macrolitter close to freshwater systems (Cieplik, 2021). These actions can be driven by individual human behavior, which
can vary significantly due to factors such as personal habits, convenience, awareness of proper waste disposal, and even
mood or emotions at the time of disposal. Other factors driving direct littering and dumping of macrolitter include
cultural, societal and economic factors, including the availability and effectiveness of municipal solid waste
management services. A crucial open question is the role of local leakage processes in macrolitter presence along lake 
shores and riverbanks. In this study, we investigate the impact of differing land-use features on macrolit- ter 
quantities, considering item origins and composition. This could ultimately improve our understanding of leakage 
and (terrestrial and aquatic) transport mechanisms of macrolitter into freshwater systems. Additionally, it could 
provide an initial step to differentiate between locally and non-locally leaked items, as well as items transported for 
short distances and items traveling long distances before beaching.

Land-use features are an explaining factor for variability in macrolit- ter accumulation in coastal, marine and land
environments (Aydin et al., 2016; Grelaud and Ziveri, 2021; Harris et al., 2021; Pietz et al., 2021). To date, only one
study has investigated the role of land- use features in macrolitter accumulation in freshwater systems in the United
States (Cowger et al., 2019). The proximity of land-based litter sources, such as recreational and urban areas, might be
an indicator for high leakage rates (i.e. high littering rates and losses into the environment). Impervious surfaces
also generate higher surface runoff volumes, which in turn can accelerate leakage and propagation of litter from land to
the aquatic environment (Baldwin et al., 2016). Many regional and global scale studies model plastic waste inputs into
lakes, rivers and oceans, as a function of nearshore population densities, generally using global population datasets
(Jambeck et al., 2015; Hoffman and Hittinger, 2017; Lebreton et al., 2017; Schmidt et al., 2017). However, higher human
densities do not necessarily translate into higher rates of leakage into the environment at a local scale (Schuyler et
al., 2021). This highlights that population density should not be used as the sole proxy for litter inputs for accurate
modeling of its distribution in the environment. Analyzing land-use features in relation to macrolitter accumulation
could reveal specific point sources of macrolitter items, such as industries and commercial areas. Additionally, such
analysis can provide insights into the impact of areas with high levels of human activity, such as recreational areas,
potentially leading to higher leakage rates into the environment. The role of several land-use features should be
considered, but has so far not been thoroughly quantified in relation to empirical data on macrolitter abundance. Such
insights are relevant for several reasons. First, a better understanding of the leakage and transport processes of
litter pollution is crucial in designing targeted intervention strategies and formulating policies to prevent and reduce
their leakage into the environment. Second, they can be used for improving large-scale models on debris distribution and 
propagation into the environment.

In this study, we test the hypothesis that land-use features partially explain the variability in macrolitter abundance
and composition in freshwater systems. We used an extensive observational dataset on macrolitter abundance, collected
across Switzerland in 11 lakes and 17 rivers (Fig. A.1). 386 surveys were conducted over a 13-month period, during which
50,649 macrolitter items were sampled on Swiss riverbanks and lake shores. We analyzed the composition and likely origin
of the most commonly found macrolitter items (n = 42,565) - herein referred to as ‘top macrolitter items’. We then
assessed the role of eleven land-use variables (buildings, city centers, recreational areas, public infrastructure,
roads, forests, marshlands, vineyards, orchards, other land and rivers and canals) in macrolitter abundance among top
items. Based on this analysis, we provide insights on the role of land-use features in macrolitter abundance in
freshwater systems.

## Data and methods

### Hypotheses on land-use and macrolitter correlations

We formulate hypotheses for the possible correlation signs between the land-use features and macrolitter abundance
(Table 1). A positive (and significant) correlation would indicate that macrolitter abundance increases with an increase
in the coverage of land-use feature con- sidered. The substantiation of the hypotheses is mainly derived from existing
observational studies. Given that understanding the relation- ships between land-use features and macrolitter abundance
is largely unresolved, for most variables, two opposite correlations could be hy- pothesized. For instance, it is yet unknown
whether rivers act more as plastic reservoirs or pathways of plastics (van Emmerik et al., 2022) and thus whether rivers
mainly deposit items on their banks or re-mobilize previously accumulated items and carry them further downstream. Both
roles can coexist, as well as vary depending on space and time, river characteristics, hydrological conditions and item
characteristics.

### Macrolitter dataset

The macrolitter data used in this research were collected between 1 April 2020 and 31 May 2021 by the Non-Governmental
Organization (NGO) Hammerdirt. Overall, 386 surveys were conducted at 143 loca- tions, located in 98 different
municipalities in Switzerland (Fig. A.1). A total of 50,649 macrolitter items were counted and categorized. Of the 386
surveys, 331 (85.8%) were undertaken along lake shores and the remaining 55 (14.2%) were undertaken along riverbanks.
The surveys were conducted by Hammerdirt staff and trained volunteers (two surveyors on average per survey). Several
criteria determined the selection of the survey locations. Firstly, the survey area had to be a bank of a lake or river,
with direct contact with the water. The length of the sampling area was determined as the longest continuous stretch of
lake shore or riverbank accessible. Despite international protocols such as OSPAR requiring to survey areas of 100 m of
length (Wenneker et al., 2010), this was not possible in the Swiss context, given that the majority of beaches have
smaller strips of land available (due to both legal and physical barriers), with a site median length for the surveys
considered in this study of 45 m. The width of the survey area was defined as the distance from the waterline to the
high-water line. The high-water line is intended as the mark left by the highest water level reached during a 
particular period, such as during a flood or a period of high waters. Overall, the survey
locations had an area typically comprised between 50 and 200 m2. Secondly, survey locations were required to be
accessible (both physically and legally) throughout the year. Also, the site had to be within 30 min of the nearest
public transport station to ensure that surveyors could easily reach it. Finally, survey locations that had already been
selected for the national Swiss Litter Report (Barer and Kull, 2018) in 2018 were preferred to facilitate time-series
analysis.

During each survey, participants collected all visible items > 5 mm in size (i.e. macrolitter). Items were subsequently
categorized using the Marine Litter Beach item classification, which contains a total of 217 categories (Marine Strategy
Framework Directive Technical Subgroup on Marine Litter, 2013). The measurement process itself introduces in- herent
uncertainty, which includes potential misclassification of items by observers and the possibility of missing some items.
To minimize the uncertainty, we grouped the survey results by riverbank and lake shore locations, as the grouping helps
to average out individual measurement errors. It is unclear how representative the survey locations are of the level of
macrolitter pollution of all lake shores and riverbanks in Switzerland. To date, no comprehensive studies have
quantified the uncertainty associated with macrolitter surveys, making it challenging to provide a precise estimate of
the uncertainty in our measurements. Further research is needed to address this knowledge gap and enhance our
understanding of the uncertainties inherent to macrolitter surveys.

All items collected and analyzed during each survey were also categorized by material types (plastic, glass, metal,
textile and paper). In addition, we categorized all items by their functional characteristics, either morphological or
related to their use: plastic fragments and pieces, industry and construction, tobacco, food and beverages, sanitary, 
non-food packaging, and others. This classification by functional type was done by using the description of each 
macrolitter category as an indicator for the use and morphological characteristics of items. Items for which 
no clear use or morphological characteristics could be inferred from the category description were categorized 
as ‘others’. We considered expanded polystyrene (EPS) under the industry and con- struction type. In Europe, this plastic 
item is mainly used as insulation material in the construction sector (Kawecki and Nowack, 2019; Lobelle et al., 2023). 
Macrolitter abundance was ultimately reported in both total items count and number of items/100 m of shoreline, 
in line with the EU Marine Litter Baselines, which express marine macrolitter abundance in items/100 m of 
shoreline (Marine Strategy Framework Directive Technical Subgroup on Marine Litter, 2013).

### Geospatial study design

At each survey location, we extracted land-use features within a buffer area. We defined an area of 5.8 km2 (1500 m in
radius) around each survey location and extracted land-use features of interest for each area (Fig. 1). The buffer area
size was based on the average overland macrolitter transport distance (1500 m) found by Cowger et al. (2022). We chose a
hexagonal shape for the area around the survey location as it offers several advantages for potential mapping of an
entire territory (Birch et al., 2007). Firstly, the hexagonal shape provides a more uniform coverage of a territory
compared to circles. This ensures that no gaps or overlaps occur between adjacent buffer areas, allowing for a
comprehensive and accurate representation of the land-use features within the territory. Secondly, the hexagonal shape
allows for efficient and systematic sampling or grid-based analysis. The

regularity and symmetry of the hexagons facilitate consistent spatial arrangement and enable easier interpretation and
comparison of the land-use data. Thirdly, the hexagonal shape minimizes edge effects and distortions, unlike squares or
rectangles (Birch et al., 2007).

### Land-use dataset

We used the Swiss Land Use Statistics (Federal office of topography Swisstopo, 2023) to extract land-use features at
each survey location. This dataset is freely available and is updated every year. The land- use dataset is available in
vector format and covers the entire country. The precision ranges from 0.2 m to 3 m, depending on the features. Among
the land-use features extracted in this dataset, the following are identified: (1) Buildings (2) City centers (3)
Recreational areas (4) Public infrastructure (5) Vineyards (6) Orchards (7) Marshlands (8) Forests (9) Rivers and
canals, and (10) Roads. While these are the most prominent land-use features, other land-use types were present in the
dataset, such as barren rocks, cliffs and glaciers. However, their presence in the survey locations is marginal compared
to the ten extracted features and we did not include them in our analysis. The land-use dataset does not cover all the
terrestrial land, and we thus generated an eleventh feature, called ‘Other land’, for all the areas not covered by the
features listed above. A visual inspection using Google aerial imagery showed that these areas are mainly covered by
fallows, pastures, and grasslands.

The feature ‘Buildings’ refers mainly to residential houses and build- ings. Recreational areas include diverse public
uses, from sport fields to camp sites, and capture all land surfaces dedicated to social activ- ities. City centers
identify the central areas of urban agglomerations. Public infrastructure includes schools, hospitals, prisons,
cemeteries and administrative buildings. The feature ‘Roads’ refers to all roads intersecting the buffer area, from small paths to
highways. Rivers and canals include all rivers and canals within the buffer area and that intersect the lake shores or
riverbanks of the survey location. All land- use features except roads and rivers were expressed in km2 and in
percentage (%) of the total terrestrial surface of the buffer area around the survey location. To determine the total
terrestrial surface, lake and river surfaces were subtracted from the total surface. Roads and rivers features were
expressed in km. Table B.1 in Appendix B details the land-use characteristics for both lake and river survey locations.
The dominant land-use class is buildings (49.1% and 41.5% for lake and river locations, respectively), followed by other
land areas (21.1%– 27.7%) and forested areas (17.6%–19.4%). The other land-use features represent much lower shares of
the land-use (< 10%). The average length of the road network across survey locations is between 55.6 km and 10.0 km; and
the average length of rivers and canals is between 1.0 km and 6.2 km (Table B.1).

### Correlation analysis between land-use variables and macrolitter abundance

To determine the commonly found items, we considered those that were observed at least 20 times during the sampling
period. For each of these commonly found items, we correlated their abundance (expressed as items per 100 m) with
various land-use features. The cor- relations between land-use features and the top macrolitter items were calculated
using the Spearman correlation analysis, which tests for sta- tistically significant monotonic relationships between
variables (Glasser and Winter, 1961). The null hypothesis tested was that there is no correlation between the land-use
features and the top items. The test results provide information about the direction (R) of the correlation and whether
the association is likely due to chance (𝑝-value). We consider the correlation statistically significant if the 𝑝-value
is less than 0.05. We only report correlations that are statistically significant, as correlations below this threshold
are deemed too uncertain. It is important to note that the Spearman correlation analysis provides an indication of the
relationship between land-use features and macrolitter abundance, but it does not establish causation, as other factors
may also contribute to the observed association.

## Results and discussion

### A majority of consumption- and industry and construction-related items

A total of 50,649 macrolitter items were sampled in Switzerland between 1 April 2020 and 31 May 2021 (48,239 on lake
shores and 2,410 on riverbanks). These items were classified into 199 distinct categories, reflecting the diverse range
of sources and types of macrolit- ter encountered. Among the lake survey locations, 34 categories were identified with a
minimum count of 20 items observed during at least one survey. For the riverbank survey locations, the most abundantly
encountered items were distributed across ten distinct categories. These top categories accounted for 82.9% of the total
items found, 84.1% (n = 40,566) for lake shores, and 58.0% (n = 1,399) for riverbanks. The most abundant items were
mainly identified as plastic material (89.9%) while other materials include glass (6.1%), metal (2.8%) and paper (1.1%).
Among the most commonly found items, the top ten cate- gories (Fig. 2A) at lake locations consist of cigarette filters,
fragmented plastics, expanded polystyrene, and food wrappers. The category of fragmented plastics includes various
plastic types, such as foil, hard fragments, and foam. At riverbank locations (Fig. 2B), top ten items include diapers
and wipes, cigarette filters, glass bottles and pieces, and industrial sheeting. Among the ten most frequently found
item categories at riverbank locations, seven of them also appear among the 34 most commonly found categories at lake
shores. This indicates a good agreement among the most commonly found items between lake shore and riverbank locations. 

A considerable amount of items (n = 10,924, 26.6% of total) can be attributed to the industrial and construction sectors
(Table C.4). Expanded polystyrene is often used as insulation material in the con- struction sector, and industrial
sheeting is commonly used in the hor- ticulture, industrial and construction sectors. These items are not typi- cally
linked to consumer littering behavior, implying that their leakage into the environment may occur differently. This
could include acci- dental leakage near their manufacturing or construction sites, or during transportation.
Alternatively, intentional dumping may also be a con- tributing factor. Items related to food and beverages (19.0%), as
well as tobacco products (21.7%), contribute significantly to the top items. To- gether, these items make up for the
highest share of items (40.7%). The presence of consumption-related items can be attributed to direct lit- tering by
consumers, with food wrappings, packaging, cigarette filters, and glass bottles being commonly discarded on land by
visitors (Kelley and Ambikapathi, 2016; Kolenda et al., 2021; Ballatore et al., 2022; Youngblood et al., 2022; Vanapalli
et al., 2023). Additionally, plas- tic fragments and pieces also contribute significantly, accounting for 17.4% of the
top items. Hypothesizing pathways for plastic fragments is more difficult, because of their reduced size, fragmented
state, and om- nipresence. Fragmentation and degradation could be the result of long residence times on both land and
water. Further investigation into the transport pathways and sources of these fragmented items is required. The
remaining types of plastic contribute to a lower proportion of the top items, each accounting for less than 10% (Table
C.4). Some sanitary products likely make their way into the environment at combined sewer overflows (CSOs), stormwater
outlets and waste water treatment plants (WWTs) (Kawecki and Nowack, 2019). Sanitary products were found in higher
proportion at riverbank locations than at lake shore locations (21.8% and 5.2%, respectively). This is within the range
of the share of hygiene and sanitary products (6.3%) found on British beaches (British Marine Conservation Society,
2016). A modeling study found that 80% of macroplastic inputs into the water in Switzerland are attributable to sewer
overflows (Kawecki and Nowack, 2020), a much higher proportion than what our analysis suggests.

Except from the higher share in items attributed to the industrial sector, the composition of the top macrolitter
items found in Switzerland is similar to that found in other observational studies on macrolitter abundance across
European waterways. Tramoy et al. (2019) found that plastic pellets, unidentified fragments and sticks (cotton buds and
lollipop sticks) were the most abundant objects accumulated on the riverbanks of the Seine river, France. Other
abundant items included expanded polystyrene, caps and industrial packaging films (Tramoy et al., 2019). Plastic
fragments, food wrapping and packaging, caps and lids, cotton swabs and cigarette filters also feature among the top 20
items found on Dutch riverbanks (van Emmerik and Schwarz, 2020). These items were also among the top ten litter items
collected on the riverbanks of the Adour river in France (Bruge et al., 2018). This consistency in macrolitter
composition is likely the result of similar consumption patterns and waste management practices among European
countries. Another explaining factor might be that transport and deposition affect specific litter items differently and
that thus, the items commonly found on freshwater shores are those preferentially deposited, due to their
characteristics and transport processes. Among the top macrolitter items found in the above-mentioned studies and in
Switzerland, several categories indicates high amounts of caps and lids. In contrast, plastic bottles were rarely found.
This could be due to the high recycling rate of plastic bottles and thus their removal from the environment. Another
explanation could be that bottles in transport in the water would likely sinks into the lake or river, whereas the caps
stay afloat and wash up on the shores due to the combined action of wind, current and discharge, as suggested by Bruge et al. (2018).


### Roads and buildings are overall good predictors of macrolitter abundance

Overall, land-use features related to urban coverage emerged as the most influential predictors of macrolitter
abundance. Indeed, roads and buildings resulted in the highest number of positive correlations (n = 18) with macrolitter
items. Correlation coefficients varied significantly, ranging from 0.08 to 0.53. Out of these 18 correlations, 15 of
them cor- responded to both roads and buildings, indicating a strong relationship between these two factors. As much as
64.1% of top items were found positively correlated with roads, and 61.8% with buildings (Table D.5). Among land-use
features, roads and buildings resulted in the highest number of positive associations (n = 18) with macrolitter items.
These results are consistent with previous observation-based studies that have identified roadsides and built-up areas
are macrolitter accumulation zones (Matos et al., 2012; Tasseron et al., 2020; Pietz et al., 2021; Tasseron et al.,
2023; Winston et al., 2023). Public infrastructure buildings displayed a positive correlation with 58.5% of top items
(Table D.5). Other land-use features related to urban coverage, such as city centers and recreational areas, also
demonstrated significant and positive correlations with top macrolitter items, although to a lesser extent than
buildings, roads and public infrastructure. One reason for this could be that city centers and recreational areas cover
lower share of the total land-use area at survey locations (Table B.1). The presence of macrolitter items associated to
direct consumption, such as tobacco, food and beverages and sanitary products was found to be

strongly and positively correlated with urban coverage. All tobacco- related items (cigarette filters and plastic
packaging for tobacco) and plastic fragments and pieces exhibit significant correlations with multi- ple land-use
features associated with urban coverage. Cigarette filters, the most prevalent item found throughout the study (n =
8485), showed positive correlations with various land-use features related to urban coverage, supporting the hypothesis
that these items tend to accu- mulate in areas where direct littering occurs (Vanapalli et al., 2023). Similarly, food
and beverage-related items often demonstrate frequent correlations with urban coverage features. This is the case for
food wrappers, metal bottle caps, lids and pull tabs from cans, as well as lids and cap rings from plastic bottles and
aluminum foil (specifically for lake shores). However, other food and beverage-related items displayed limited
associations with land-use features, resulting in 44.8% of food and beverage-related items with less than three positive
and significant associations with land-use features.

Industry and construction-related items show no positive correla- tions with land-use features (Table D.6). Expanded
polystyrene, indus- trial sheeting, foam packing for insulation, plastic construction waste, plastic sheeting, foamed
EVA, and other construction materials have no or very few (less than three) positive significant correlations with land-
use variables (Fig. 3). Three factors may explain the absence of positive associations between industry and
construction-related items and land-use features. First, the spatial distribution of these items along riverbanks and
lake shores may be diffuse and thus independent of land characteristics. Previous research found that expanded 
polystyrene items are likely to be transported over longer
distances in rivers than other items (Ryan, 2021). Because of their low densities and thus high buoyancy, these items
are more likely to be mobile in the en- vironment, notably through wind action. Thus, changes in land-use features may
not significantly impact the accumulation of these items in the environment. Second, the leakage and supply of industry
and construction-related items into the environment could also be spatially diffuse, resulting in limited or no
discernible relationship with land-use features. Finally, it is worth noting that the available land-use dataset does
not differentiate buildings and facilities specifically associated with the production and use of industry-related
items. Buildings related to the industrial and construction sector are not distinguished from other types of buildings.
As a result, establishing correlations between potential production and use areas, and areas of accumulation, becomes
difficult.

### Our research supports our initial hypothesis concerning forests

marshlands, and other land, indicating that areas with lower population densities and minimal human activity exhibit
reduced littering rates and subsequent accumulation. In the case of these land-use features, a predominant proportion of
significant negative correlations were observed, accounting for 28.3%, 46.1% and 65.6% of the top items for forests,
marshlands and other land, respectively (Table D.5). This pattern indicates a reduced occurrence of macrolitter items in
these environments. This was particularly evident for consumption-related items, such as cigarette filters, food
wrappers, cotton buds and swab sticks, metal bottle caps, lids and pull tabs from cans (Fig. 3), all of which exhibited
statistically significant negative correlations with forests, marshlands, and other land. It is important to note that
‘Other land’ primarily encompasses agricultural and unproductive land, where minimal direct littering of consumption-
related items can be expected. Additionally, agricultural land could involve plastic film and sheet use and leakage, as
documented by MacLeod et al. (2021). Our results also show notable positive links between expanded polystyrene (EPS) and
foamed ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) with forests and other land. Interestingly, plastic bags and plastic pieces also
exhibited a positive correlation with forested areas. However, the exact reasons behind this correlation remain unclear,
and further investigation is needed to understand why such a relationship exists. Furthermore, the positive correlations
observed for EPS, foamed EVA, and industrial sheeting (in river locations) may be attributed to their sources being
primarily located outside of urban areas or their potential for longer-distance transport.

Among the land-use features related to agricultural use, only vine- yards showed positive correlations with a
significant portion of the top items, accounting for 42.3% of them (Table D.5). Among the items displaying a positive
association with vineyards, some can be directly linked to their utilization in this agricultural sector, such as
industrial sheeting, foamed items, and non-packaging/insulation pieces. Additionally, the presence of other items
positively correlated with vineyards suggests that these areas are frequently frequented, resulting in observable
littering of consumptions-related items. This is evident in items such as plastic fragments, food wrappers, plastic
packaging for tobacco, as well as lids and cap rings from plastic bottles (Fig. 3). Orchards showed minimal significant
correlations with the top macrolitter items, indicating that they are not a reliable indicator of macrolitter
accumulation.

##  Synthesis and outlook

The results of this study have several implications, particularly concerning the design of clean-up and reduction
strategies. We found that land-use features, in particular those related to urban coverage such as roads and buildings,
are robust indicators for the abundance of the majority of macrolitter items on riverbanks and lake shores.

Over 60% of the top items found on lake shores and riverbanks were positively and significantly correlated with roads
and buildings (64.1% and 61.8%, respectively). For items strongly correlated with land-use features, such as tobacco-
related products and items from take-out consumption, localized mitigation projects are likely to yield significant
reductions in their abundance. These efforts can focus on targeted interventions at local (municipal) geographic scales
to address littering hotspots effectively (Doolin and Zhang, 2015; Kelley and Ambikapathi, 2016). Such approaches
acknowledge the need for behavioral changes and community engagement to effectively reduce macrolitter abun- dance and
minimize its environmental impact. Therefore, it is crucial to address the local inputs and human component inherent in
macrolitter pollution for the development of comprehensive and sustainable litter management strategies. Certain
macrolitter items, particularly those associated with the industrial and construction sector, showed limited or no
associations with land-use features. However, it is important to note that our study did not have data available to
directly test the relationship between macrolitter abundance and manufacturing and construction sites. Therefore, it is
possible that such an association exists, but we were unable to capture it with the current data. Assuming no
relationship between industry-related items and land-use features, it would be advisable to implement strategies
targeting these items at a regional scale, as they appear to be less influenced by specific land-use characteristics. By
addressing the specific sources and practices within this sector, clean-up efforts can effectively minimize the
occurrence of such items. Overall, both regional and local mitigation strategies are necessary for achieving substantial
litter reduction, as our study identified a considerable proportion of macrolitter items associated with land-use
features, as well as items that exhibited no such associa- tions. By combining efforts at different geographic scales,
stakeholders can create comprehensive reduction and clean-up strategies to tackle macrolitter pollution.

Furthermore, our study provides insights into the transport behavior of macrolitter. We highlight the spatial proximity 
of items to their potential leakage sources, as evidenced by the
numerous significant correlations found between tobacco, food, and drink-related items and land-use features associated
with urban coverage. This supports the findings of previous studies, highlighting that macrolitter items are not
transported over long distances either in rivers (Tramoy et al., 2020; van Emmerik et al., 2022; Lotcheris et al., 2024)
or over land Kelley and Ambikapathi (2016), Ballatore et al. (2022), Cowger et al. (2022). Macrolitter items tend to be
found in the vicinity of their pollution sources (Kelley and Ambikapathi, 2016; Ballatore et al., 2022; Cowger et al.,
2022; Schuyler et al., 2022). The high proportion (18%) of fragmented plastics found at lake shore locations may suggest
that frag- mentation and degradation of entire items occurred during transport in lakes. However, fragmentation
processes could also take place through over land transport or when accumulated at lake shores. In addition, our results
emphasize the stochastic nature of macrolitter pollution, with local factors and human behaviors contributing to the
observed variability in spatial distribution (Cowger et al., 2022). In their in- vestigation of macrolitter transport
mechanisms at roadsides, Cowger et al. (2022) considered factors such as runoff, wind direction, and human travel. They
found that human travel played a predominant role in macrolitter accumulation along roadsides. Understanding this
stochastic component raises important considerations for incorporating it into predictive models. Most studies on
macrolitter abundance have so far primarily investigated the role of environmental factors such as runoff, wind, river
discharge, water levels, flood occurrence and magnitude (Mellink et al., 2022; Roebroek et al., 2021a,b; van Emmerik et al., 2023).

Our findings highlight the need to shift towards including ur- ban coverage and human littering as key factors in
predictive mod- els (Tasseron et al., 2023). By integrating the stochastic element and the influence of human
activities, we can improve the accuracy and ef- fectiveness of predictive models for macrolitter abundance and develop
more targeted strategies for its prevention and management. These efforts could include a greater focus on identifying
source locations of macrolitter, such as restaurants, convenience stores, and supermarkets, as highlighted by Kelley and
Ambikapathi (2016) and Ballatore et al. (2022).

Moreover, the geospatial analysis undertaken in this study em- ployed an isotropic delineation of the area surrounding
the survey locations. Consequently, our approach did not consider transport di- rectionality, which could potentially
influence both the accumulation and dispersion patterns of macrolitter. We found that road network was a significant
predictor for the presence of over 60% of observed macrolitter, indicating a potential influence of connectivity factors
on macrolitter pathways from sources to accumulation sites. However, roads may serve as indicators of human activity
rather than direct conduits for macrolitter transport on land. Additionally, while our analysis did not directly account
for directional transport, previous re- search (Stocker, 2020) has highlighted the role of wind as a significant driver
in the movement of litter, irrespective of street directionality.

## Conclusions

We investigated macrolitter composition at lake shores and river- banks in Switzerland. Items that can be related to
consumable products, such as tobacco and food and beverages products make up for the highest share of items (41%).
Industry and construction-related items also constitute a significant proportion of macrolitter items, accounting for
nearly 27% of the top items found on lake shores and riverbanks in Switzerland.

We found that urban coverage features, particularly roads and buildings, are robust indicators for the abundance of the
majority of macrolitter items on riverbanks and lake shores (∼ 60% of top items), notably items related to consumable
products. However, industry and construction-related items show limited or no correlations with land- use features at
the survey locations. Overall, urban land-use features are good predictors for the most commonly found macrolitter
items, with the notable exception of industry-related items.

Our results show the need for targeted approaches in litter reduction strategies at different geographical scales to
achieve effective impact. Local-scale efforts are likely to yield significant results for consumable products, while
regional targeted strategies and actions may be more appropriate for other types of items, including those related to
the in- dustry. Furthermore, we emphasize the importance of further research to comprehend the dynamics of litter
transport over land and within freshwater systems. Such knowledge is crucial for establishing more comprehensive and
effective strategies to mitigate macrolitter pollution and safeguard our aquatic environments.